---
type: post
title: Introductory Knot Theory
---

<p>Today I started working through the text "The Knot Book" by Colin Adams. The first section covers basic knot theory without going too deeply into rigorous theory. For instance, a knot is defined as a closed curve in R^3 with no intersections, however I am curious if this definition excludes certain so-called 'wild knots' that may appear. Here is an outline of the topics covered in the first section:</p>

<ul>
  <li>Knots, projections, crossings</li>
  <li>Unknot, trefoil, and figure-eight knots</li>
<ul>

<p>The second section covers composition of knots. Given two knots J and K, we form the composition J#K in a very similar manner as the connected sum of two surfaces: with disjoint projections of J and K we remove an arc from both J and K which is 'outside' the projection (however Adams defines outside, though we get the picture) and connect the two knots such that no crossing is formed.</p>

<p>We say that a knot is a composite knot if it is the composition of two knots, both of which we call factors of the knot. If a knot cannot be produced as the composition of two nontrivial knots, we say it is a prime knot. Adams asks a very interesting question here: is the unknot a composite knot? He then points out that an unsettling result would follow, for every knot is the composition of itself with the unknot, implying that every knot is the composition of itself with the factor knots which comprise the unknot. Every knot is a composite knot. Luckily this is false, though we have yet to learn why!</p>

<p id="question">Question: Why are the unknot, trefoil knot, and figure-eight knot prime knots?</p>
